In October of 1962, the world stood on
the brink of nuclear war.
>> It has been armed.
>> For 13 days, the threat was immediate,
and it thrust President John Kennedy
into the most dangerous crisis of the
Cold War. I remember when we heard those
words, "Any nuclear attack will require
full retaliation." It was almost too
much to comprehend.
There were Soviet missiles in Cuba. They
were pointed at us.
It was really, really scary.
Cuba has just gone through a violent
upheaval. The Batista government is out.
The real revolution is about to begin.
>> January 1959, Castro overthrows Batista.
Cuba begins aligning with the Soviet
Union. Our limited war forces should be
>> United States grows concerned about a
communist presence so very close to its
shores.
>> March 1960, President Eisenhower
authorizes a CIA plan to train Cuban
exiles to overthrow Castro, laying the
groundwork for the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Late 1960, President Kennedy is briefed
on the plan and inherits it.
Arthur Slesinger wrote a memo to John
Kennedy saying that this would hurt his
moral authority and the credibility of
the United States. But the plan had such
momentum that the memo made little
impact.
On April 17th, 1961, 1,400 Cuban exiles
trained by the CIA landed at the Bay of
Pigs.
The assumption was that the Cuban people
would rise up in support of this
invading force. The uprising never
materialized and Castro's forces
responded with overwhelming artillery
fire. Over 100 members of the invading
force were killed. More than 12,200 were
captured and the invasion collapsed in
only 3 days.
In the days that followed, Kennedy
walked around the White House saying,
"How did I ever let it happen? How could
I have been so stupid? I know better
than to let experts advise me like
this."
Jackie Kennedy later told the story that
the president wept. He just said he kept
thinking about the fate of the Cuban
exiles. They would end up in jail
because of the decisions that he had
made.
The fiasco emboldened Cuba to grow
closer to the Soviet Union. At the same
time, Cruchef interpreted as a sign of
Kennedy's weakness and his inexperience
in foreign affairs and emboldened him to
set up for the missiles in Cuba.
The most important thing about the Bay
of Pigs was that it taught Kennedy a
series of lessons. He saw the dangers of
group think. He realized it relied much
too much on military experts, and he
knew he had to broaden his inner
decision-making structure so there'd be
people there who could argue with him
and question his assumptions.
On October 14th, 1962, an American U2
spy plane photographed evidence of
Soviet missile sites under construction
in Cuba, just 90 miles from US shores.
The discovery prompted enormous fear in
Washington of a nuclear attack and led
to the 13-day confrontation known as the
Cuban Missile Crisis, considered the
most dangerous moment of the Cold War.
In response to his learning about the
missile sites in Cuba, Kennedy convened
a group of trusted advisers called the
XCOM, including this time his brother,
Robert Kennedy. Around the table, there
were divergent opinions. There were some
who wanted immediate air strikes.
There were others who wanted a
full-scale invasion,
others wanted peaceful diplomacy.
You know, had he chosen air strikes
followed by a full-scale invasion,
Kennedy recognized it could have led to
a world war with the Soviet Union with
allies on either side, leading possibly
to a nuclear confrontation.
Kennedy chose a much more measured path.
On October 22nd, he announced a naval
quarantine of Cuba. He used the word
quarantine rather than blockade because
blockade had a specific meaning in
international law and he thought that
quarantine would open him more to
peaceful negotiations in the future.
So the US warships took up positions in
the Caribbean
ready to stop any Soviet ships that were
coming in with more cargo to continue
building the missile sites within Cuba.
>> 10.
>> It's hard to imagine how scary this time
period was. It has been armed.
>> Everyday Americans were racked with fear
about the possibility of nuclear war.
>> 5 4 3 2 1.
>> Good evening, my fellow citizens.
This government, as promised, has
maintained the closest surveillance of
the Soviet military buildup on the
island of Cuba. Within the past week,
unmistakable evidence has established
the fact that a series of offensive
missile sites is now in preparation on
that imprisoned island.
The purpose of these bases can be none
other than to provide a nuclear strike
capability against the Western
Hemisphere.
>> I remember hearing this speech when I
was in college. We knew the president
was going to be speaking to the nation
about something really important, but we
had no idea really of the dimensions
that it would cover.
We were the same kids that had been
ducking covering under our desks when we
were in grammar school and in in middle
school. remember what to do, friends.
Now, tell me right out loud, what are
you supposed to do when you see the
flash,
>> never understanding when we got older
how the desk was going to protect us
from a nuclear blast,
what made the speech so dramatic was
that none of us at that time even knew
there were missiles in Cuba, much less
that there were nuclear missiles in
Cuba, much less that they were pointed
at us, much less that we'd be on the
brink of potential nuclear war. and the
destruction of the world. That's what
made that speech so powerful, so
dramatic, so scary, so urgent, and
created such panic on the part of all of
us. When you look at this moment of John
Kennedy sitting at the desk and he's
facing more cameras than I can imagine
would normally be crowded into that Oval
Office, knowing what he has to say,
knowing the decisions that he is making,
knowing the consequences of those
decisions, just can't imagine the
pressures that were on him at that
moment. And yet he delivered it with a
calmness, with a sense of its
importance, without minimizing what the
dangers were. Kennedy portrayed the
missiles as an intolerable threat to US
national security. But at the same time,
he signaled that he sought peace, not
conquest.
Hour by hour, breaking news would break
in. All this playing out in front of our
very eyes in real time. It wasn't just a
US event. It was global. People watching
all over the world. and the Soviet Union
depicting their own narrative of a
protection of socialism against American
imperialism so that everybody's watching
this at the same time. What we were
witnessing was a dramatic narrative who
would blink first.
Even as the quarantine deepened, Kennedy
and Cruchev kept secret negotiations
going through back channels through
letters to one another. There were two
different letters that came from
Cruchev. One was consiliatory, talking
about the fact that perhaps there could
be an agreement if Kennedy would remove
the missiles that were in Turkey. But
then he sent a later defiant letter
saying that the freedom of seas was
being violated and if we tried to stop
their ships, then they would have to
take action against us. Kennedy wisely
decided just to respond to the
consiliatory letter and talked about a
possible agreement. The United States
would remove the missiles that were in
Turkey and that would remain secret for
a period of time. We would declare that
we would not invade Cuba if they in turn
would remove their missiles from Cuba.
And that was the agreement that was
ultimately reached.
>> Our goal is not the victory of might,
but the vindication of right.
>> The crisis ended on October 28th, 1962,
13 days after it began. This was
considered a major success in crisis
diplomacy in avoiding nuclear war.
>> Not peace at the expense of freedom, but
both peace and freedom here in this
hemisphere. and we hope around the
world.
>> In his handling of the Cuban missile
crisis, Kennedy exhibited a leadership
style very different from the one he had
exhibited during the Bay of Pigs. He
weighed his options. He moved patiently.
He listened to a broad range of
advisers, including people who disagreed
with him at the beginning, and offered a
far range of different opinions. These
are the moments when you're very glad
that you were in the hands of somebody
who had the decision-making capabilities
that he had.
>> Thank you, and good night.